🏗️ Docker Architecture (Overview)

Docker follows a client-server architecture where different components work together to build, run, and manage containers.

Main components:

Docker Client
Docker Daemon
Docker Registry

1️⃣ Docker Client

The Docker Client is the interface through which users interact with Docker.
It sends commands to the Docker Daemon.

Uses commands like docker run, docker build
Communicates via REST API

👉 Example:

docker run nginx

2️⃣ Docker Daemon (dockerd)

The Docker daemon is the core engine that runs in the background.

Builds images
Runs containers
Manages networks and volumes
Listens to Docker API requests

3️⃣ Docker Registry

A Docker Registry is a storage system where Docker images are stored and shared.

Public or private
Images can be pushed and pulled

👉 Example:
Docker Hub

🌐 Public Registry

A public registry is a repository where Docker images are openly available to everyone.

Anyone can pull images
Anyone (usually with an account) can push images
Used for sharing open-source projects

👉 Example:

Docker Hub

🔒 Private Registry

A private registry is restricted and only accessible to authorized users or teams.

Secure and controlled access
Used by companies for internal projects
Requires authentication

👉 Examples:

Amazon Elastic Container Registry
Azure Container Registry

🧱 Docker Object Types (Detailed Explanation)

These are the main building blocks of Docker.

1️⃣ Container
A container is a running instance of a Docker image.

It executes your application
Isolated environment (separate from host system)
Lightweight and fast

👉 Example: Running a web app using Nginx inside a container

2️⃣ Image
A Docker image is a read-only template used to create containers.

Contains app code + dependencies + libraries
Built using Dockerfile
Cannot be modified once created

3️⃣ Network
A Docker network allows containers to communicate with each other.

Containers can talk via IP or container name
Supports isolation and security

👉 Example:

4️⃣ Volume
A volume is used for persistent data storage in Docker.

Data is stored outside the container
Even if container is deleted, data remains safe

👉 Example:

Database data stored in a volume
